=== Bitcoin Q+A - Privacy tips

****
* Source: https://bitcoiner.guide/privacytips/
* Author: BitcoinQ+A
* Date copied: 2022-05-24
****

==== *10 Tips to Interact with Bitcoin More Privately*

As incredible as Bitcoin is, it still comes with some tradeoffs that
users need to contend with. Depending on how you interact with the
protocol, there are many pot holes that can trip up new users which can
result in information leaks which can, quite frankly, be dangerous. I’ve
put together a short 10 step guide to help newcomers improve their
privacy when interacting with Bitcoin. This isn’t designed to be a ‘must
have’ list for everyone to live by from day 1, everyone has different
skill levels and priorities, so understanding and implementing all of
this from the start just isn’t going to happen.

The steps list the simplest and most important first, then get more
technical the further down you go. Obviously you don’t have to do them
in order, but look at the later steps as something to work towards
longer term as you look to really lock down your privacy. Listed
underneath each step will be the tradeoffs that come with each.

I am by no means a privacy expert and continue to learn from other, far
more experienced bitcoiners than myself, so if you think I’ve missed
anything please let me know!

===== Step 1 - Don’t tell anyone

I told you the steps start simple… This may seem obvious but I feel like
it needs to be said anyway. The less people that know you have bitcoin,
the better. There have been numerous accounts of people being either
assaulted physically or hacked online resulting in them losing bitcoin.
Think about it, are you really gaining anything by posting a screenshot
on Twitter of your latest bitcoin purchase?

*Tradeoffs* - You can’t flex on Twitter you may find it difficult to
help onboard others without giving away the fact you own Bitcoin.

[[step-2---control-your-own-keys--practice-coin-control]]
===== Step 2 - Control your own keys + Practice coin control

Hopefully something you learned early on in your bitcoin career, not
your keys, not your coins. If someone else has custody of your bitcoin,
you essentially have zero privacy. They know your complete balance, so
look to move those coins into a wallet where you control the private
keys as quickly as possible.

When selecting a wallet look to use one that offers full coin control.
Coin control allows you to label and manage the specific pieces of
bitcoin (called UTXO’s) you receive. This can be very useful when you
come to spend so that you don’t unwittingly combine UTXO’s from
undesirable sources. If all of your bitcoin are coming from the same
source eg a KYC exchange then you could possibly place less of an
emphasis on this aspect but it’s a good habit to get into.

link:/wallet[Here] is a website I created to help you compare the
different types of Bitcoin wallets.

*Tradeoffs* - You need to remember to label your UTXO’s so you can
easily identify their source when you come to spend.

===== Step 3 - Be anonymous online

This is a trend that dates back almost to the start of the internet.
Create an online persona and keep it completely separate from your real
identity. You can create accounts on Twitter and Telegram etc without
supplying any personal details. Obviously you need to ensure that when
using your online alias you do not give away any sensitive information
that could be linked to your real identity, which links back to step 1.
The less people know about you, the better.

*Tradeoffs* - You need to take extra care when online. Some accounts
require a phone number so think about obtaining a separate sim.

===== Step 4 - Use encryption tools

You might think this is a strange one to include at step 4, but there
are plenty of tools out there now that use encryption but still have a
simple user interface. Scenarios such as getting a bitcoin address from
one device to another can leak sensitive info to third parties. Using
encryption prevents helps this.

Look for encrypted alternatives to your usual apps such as…

____
*Email* - https://tutanota.com/[Tutanota] or
https://protonmail.com/[Proton Mail]
____

____
*Messaging* - https://signal.org/en/[Signal],
https://keybase.io/[Keybase] or https://wire.com/en/[Wire]
____

____
*Notes* - https://standardnotes.org/[Standard Notes]
____

*Tradeoffs* - While the UX of encrypted services like those listed above
has improved drastically, they still have a way to go to match up with
their less secure counterparts

===== Step 5 - Use Tor/VPN Services

When browsing online, your internet service provider can see all of your
web traffic. Whether it’s searching for ‘bitcoin wallet’, querying an
explorer like https://www.kycp.org/#/[kycp.org] or connecting to your
hardware wallet’s online interface, they can see it all. The aim here is
to not tie your bitcoin related information to your network IP.

Now if you were to do those activities listed above via the
https://www.torproject.org/download/[Tor] browser, your ISP would not
see any of that traffic. The Tor network bounces your traffic off
different ‘relays’ across its network before it reaches its final
destination. If using a mobile wallet, you should look to use one with
integrated Tor for additional privacy. How tor browser works A VPN acts
slightly differently. It provides privacy by ‘tunneling’ your web
traffic to a different server which is generally located somewhere in a
different country. Whilst this does prevent your ISP from spying on your
online activity, you do place some trust in the VPN server you are
connecting to. https://mullvad.net/en/[Mullvad] is a good option that
allows you to pay in bitcoin and does not require any personal
information whatsoever upon signup.

*Tradeoffs* - Tor can sometimes be slow and certain websites don’t work
great. VPN’s require a level of trust in the VPN provider.

===== Step 6 - Buy non-KYC

To buy bitcoin from a KYC exchange, you will need to provide personal
information. Usually this info is in the form of name, address, drivers
license, and in some cases a selfie holding a piece of paper with the
name of the exchange and the date. KYC information not only ties your
personal identity to any bitcoin you purchase, but also creates a huge
honey pot of sensitive information at risk of being stolen due to
incompetent security practices at some of these companies.

Once you purchase bitcoin via KYC, no amount of coinjoining or elaborate
spending techniques will erase the fact that on X date and at X time,
this person bought X amount of bitcoin from this exchange. Visit
https://kycnot.me/[kycnot.me] for a great list of ways to purchase KYC
free bitcoin. Buying bitcoin in person at a meet up or event is also an
option but then you risk what we covered in Step 1. As always, there are
tradeoffs.

My personal favourite is https://bisq.network/[Bisq] and I’ve written a
step by step
https://www.bitcoinqna.com/post/10-steps-to-your-first-non-kyc-bitcoin[guide]
on how to make your first purchase. Bisq trade video by KIS Bitcoin
Those of you wanting to take it one step further and gain the ultimate
in KYC free bitcoin, by mining. Check out
https://twitter.com/DiverterNoKYC[@DiverterNoKYC] article
‘https://keybase.pub/diverterbtc/Mining%20for%20the%20Streets.doc[Mining
for the Streets]’ where he discusses how to set up your own miner at
home.

*Tradeoffs* - You generally pay a premium above the ‘spot price’ to
purchase KYC free. (A small price to pay if you ask me). The liquidity
is can sometimes be problematic and the UX still needs some work.

===== Step 7 - Run your own node

You cannot send or receive over the Bitcoin network without interacting
with a node. If that node is not yours then you are trusting someone
else’s. Let’s say you use the Trezor web interface to interact with your
hardware wallet. When you send or receive using the interface, your
transaction goes through Trezor’s node which means that they know the
balance of all of your addresses and they also know the addresses of
every entity you send bitcoin to via their app.

link:/node[Here] is a website I created to help you understand why
running a node is important and to also enable you to compare the
different types of Bitcoin nodes.

*Tradeoffs* - You will need to invest some time and energy into setting
up our node and ensuring it is kept up to date with the latest software.

===== Step 8 - Transact off chain

Just like with physical cash, moving bitcoin off chain is much less
traceable. There are two main options when transacting away from the
Bitcoin base layer…

. Use https://www.bitcoinqna.com/post/opendime-101[Opendime], a USB
stick made by https://coinkite.com[Coinkite] that allows you to transact
bitcoin in the same way you would a dollar bill, by physically handing
it from one person to the next.
. Use https://www.bitcoinqna.com/lightning[Lightning]. After you open a
lightning channel you can pay as many other users on the Lightning
network as your balance permits without creating an on-chain footprint
like a traditional transaction would. Lightning channel open and closes
still take place on chain and there are ways you can still leak your
privacy so it is by no means the magic bullet.

*Tradeoffs* - Both methods come with added friction and complexity.
Particularly Lightning which requires channel management.

===== Step 9 - Coinjoin

The Bitcoin blockchain is completely public, so if you have bitcoin that
is tied to your personal identity (say from a KYC exchange) you can be
followed on chain by anyone with the right resources that is surveilling
the blockchain. This problem gets worse if you inadvertently combine
bitcoin from different sources when making a transaction.

There are different types of Coinjoin implementations, each with their
own take on the same basic idea. Two or more users pool their UTXO’s
together into a collaborative transaction. The way the transaction is
constructed makes it very difficult for surveillance firms to know
exactly which transaction output belongs to which of the input owners.
At best anyone looking at the transaction can come up with a number of
possible scenarios as to who owns which piece of bitcoin, but they can
never be 100% sure.

One thing worth noting here is that Coinjoin does not erase your KYC
purchase history, it simply stops those coins being tracked from then
on. Providing you practice good post mix spending habits!

Samourai Wallet offer, in my opinion, the best and easiest to use
Coinjoin implementation and by far the best post mix spend toolset on
offer today. https://samouraiwallet.com/whirlpool[Whirlpool] coinjoins
can be done on your Android phone or via a desktop application that
links to your phone wallet. Here is a step by step
link:/mobilecoinjoin[guide] to your first Coinjoin using Samourai.

Non Android users should look into
https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver[Joinmarket] as
an alternative although it’s worth noting that it’s a little more
difficult to use.

*Tradeoffs* - All coinjoin implementations come with varying degrees of
complexity and fee structures.

===== Step 10 - Go Google free

This one seems especially timely given the recent automatic roll out of
the ‘contact tracing’ apps that are now baked into both Apple and
Android phone operating systems. The issue raises some serious questions
on how this software could be used for dragnet surveillance in the not
too distant future.

There are now teams of people such as https://grapheneos.org/[Graphene]
and https://copperhead.co/[Copperhead] who have created stripped down
and secured versions of the Android operating system. They come with all
Google Play services removed which takes with it a raft of tracking and
data collection software. Thanks to F-Droid, Aurora Store or direct APK
downloads you can still access your favourite apps, but do so with
caution, each extra app you install broadens the phone’s ‘attack
surface’ slightly. Be cut throat and only install what you absolutely
need to.

https://youtu.be/oO0UFZjuotg[Here] is a guide from Matt Odell showing a
full installation of Graphene OS in just 20 minutes.

It’s also good advice to go as
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/faang-stocks.asp[FAANG] free as you
can. All of these companies profit from selling your personal data.
Linux operating systems are free, open source and have come a long way
recently in terms of user experience. Linux operating systems are a
great, private alternative and can be installed on pretty much any
laptop or desktop.

There are lots to choose from but https://ubuntu.com/[Ubuntu] is one of
the most popular and easy to use.

*Tradeoffs* - Graphene/Copperhead only run on specific phones and
require some technical skills to install safely and correctly. Getting
to grips with Linux after years of Apple/Windows use make take a little
perseverance.

'''''

The steps listed here are not gospel and can change as technology and
Bitcoin evolve. Nor do they need to be completed in any specific order,
carrying out any of them should help, if only a small amount. In my
opinion, perfect privacy doesn’t exist in Bitcoin. It’s a spectrum on
which we all move along. Hopefully this article will help you make at
least one step in the right direction.

One final thing to remember, *it only takes a split second to undo years
of good privacy practices.* Move slow and ask questions.

Want to learn more on bitcoin privacy? Check out these two podcasts…

https://www.whatbitcoindid.com/podcast/the-beginners-guide-to-bitcoin-part-12-bitcoin-privacy-opsec[What
Bitcoin Did] with Jameson Lopp

https://stephanlivera.com/episode/117/[Stephan Livera] with Pura Vida

* If you need help getting started with improving your privacy, I offer
private link:/support[support calls] for those that benefit from more
personalised tuition.

'''''

https://twitter.com/BitcoinQ_A[By Bitcoin Q+A] |
https://tips.bitcoiner.guide[Support] | link:/articles[More articles] +
 +
